Draft of numeric ranges algorithms proposal (#26)
rarutyun/iso_cpp_papers: parallel_algorithms/P3732/numeric_ranges_algorithms.md

without projections and with projections.

::: cmptable

> `transform` without and with projections

### Without projections
```c++
struct foo {};
std::vector<std::tuple<int, foo, std::string>> v1{
  {5, {}, "five"}, {7, {}, "seven"}, {11, {}, "eleven"}};
std::vector<std::pair<int, std::string>> v2{
  {13, "thirteen"}, {17, "seventeen"}, {19, "nineteen"}};
std::vector<int> out(std::from_range, std::views::repeat(0, 3));;
std::vector<int> expected{65, 119, 209};

// Without projections: Big, opaque lambda
std::ranges::transform(v1, v2, out.begin(),
  [] (auto x, auto y) { return get<0>(x) * get<0>(y); });
assert(out == expected);
```

### With projections
```cpp
struct foo {};
std::vector<std::tuple<int, foo, std::string>> v1{
  {5, {}, "five"}, {7, {}, "seven"}, {11, {}, "eleven"}};
std::vector<std::pair<int, std::string>> v2{
  {13, "thirteen"}, {17, "seventeen"}, {19, "nineteen"}};
std::vector<int> out(std::from_range, std::views::repeat(0, 3));;
std::vector<int> expected{65, 119, 209};

// With projections: More readable
std::ranges::transform(v1, v2, out.begin(),
  std::multiplies{}, get_element<0>{}, get_element<0>{});
assert(out2 == expected);
```
:::

> The code without projections using a single big lambda to express the binary operation. Users have to read the big lambda

Author: ```suggestion
The code without projections uses a single big lambda to express the binary operation. Users have to read the big lambda

```

to see what it does. So does the compiler, which can hinder optimization if it's not good at inlining.
In contrast, the version with projections lets users read out loud what it does.
It also separates the "selection" or "query" part of the transform from the "arithmetic" or "computation" part. The power of
the ranges abstraction is that users can factor computation on a range from the logic to iterate over that range. It's
natural to extend this separation to selection logic as well.

##### Unary transform

> It's harder to avoid a lambda, as the function that does an operation, in the unary `transform` case.  Most of the named
> C++ Standard Library arithmetic function objects are binary.  Currying them into unary functions in C++ requires either

Author: ```suggestion
Without projections, it's harder to avoid use of lambdas in the unary `transform` case.  Most of the named
C++ Standard Library arithmetic function objects are binary.  Currying them into unary functions in C++ requires either

```

`inner_product`, we propose parallel and non-parallel convenience wrappers `ranges::dot`.  We call them `dot` and not
`inner_product` because inner products are mathematically more general. We specifically mean not just any inner product,
but the inner product that is the dot product.  Calling them `dot` has the added benefit that they represent the same
mathematical computation as `std::linalg::dot`.

### Other existing algorithms can be replaced with views

#### `iota`

C++20 has `iota_view`, the view version of `iota`. One can replace the `iota` algorithm with `iota_view` and `ranges::copy`.
In fact, one could argue that `iota_view` is the perfect use case for a view: instead of storing the entire range, users
can represent it compactly with two integers.  There also should be no optimization concerns with parallel algorithms over
an `iota_view`.  For example, the Standard specifies `iota_view` in a way that does not hinder it from being trivially
copyable, as long as its input types are.  The iterator type of `iota_view` is a random access iterator for reasonable
lower bound types (e.g., integers).

> However, `ranges::iota` algorithm was added since C++23, later than`iota_view`. For the sake of completeness we might want to add

Author: ```suggestion
However, `ranges::iota` algorithm was added in C++23, later than `iota_view`. For the sake of completeness we might want to add

```

a parallel variation of it as well. It's only going to give a syntactic advantage: if users already have `ranges::iota` in their code,
parallelizing it would be as simple as adding an execution policy (assuming the iterator/range categories are satisfied).

> We do not propose parallel `ranges::iota` in R0. We are seeking for SG9 (Ranges Study Group) feedback.

Author: ```suggestion
We do not propose parallel `ranges::iota` in R0. We are seeking SG9 (Ranges Study Group) feedback.

```

Just like `fold_left`, the `reduce` algorithm should return just the computed value.  Section 4.4 of [@P2322R6] argues that
this makes it easier to use, and improves consistency with other `ranges` algorithms like `ranges::count` and
`ranges::any_of`.  It is also consistent with [@P3179R8].  Furthermore, even if a `reduce_with_iter` algorithm were to
exist, `reduce` should not be specified in terms of it. This is for performance reasons, as Section 4.4 of [@P2322R6]
elaborates for `fold_left` and `fold_left_with_iter`.

### We don't propose `reduce_first`

Section 5.1 of [@P2760R1] asks whether the Standard Library should have a `reduce_first` algorithm. Analogously to
`fold_left_first`, `reduce_first` would use the first element of the range as the initial value of the reduction operation.
One application of `reduce_first` is to support binary operations that lack a natural identity element to serve as the
initial value. An example would be `min` on a range of `int` values, where callers would have no way to tell if `INT_MAX`
represents an actual value in the range, or a fake "identity" element (that callers may get as a result when the range is
empty).

> We do not propose `reduce_first` here, only outline arguments against and for adding it.

Author: ```suggestion
We do not propose `reduce_first` here.  Below, we outline arguments against and for adding it.

```

#### Arguments against `reduce_first`

1. [@P3179R8] already proposes parallel ranges overloads of `min_element`, `max_element`, and `minmax_element`.  Minima and
maxima are the main use cases that lack a natural identity element.
1. Users could always implement `reduce_first` themselves, by extracting the first element from the sequence and using it
as the initial value in `reduce`.
1. In practice, most custom binary operations have some value that can work like a neutral initial value, even if it's not
mathematically the identity.
1. Unlike `fold_left_first*` and `fold_right_last`, the `*reduce` algorithms are unordered.  As a result, there is no
reason to privilege the first (or last) element of the range.  One could imagine an algorithm `reduce_any` that uses any element
of the range as its initial value.
1. For parallel execution, `reduce_first` does not fully address lack of identity, and potentially creates a suboptimal execution flow.

> See [](#initial-value-vs-identity) for more detailed analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
See [the relevant section](#initial-value-vs-identity) for more detailed analysis.

```

```c++
std::vector<float> v{5.0f, 7.0f, 11.0f};

// Default initial value is float{}, which is 0.0f.
// It is also the identity for std::plus<>, the default operation 
float result = std::reduce(v.begin(), v.end());
assert(result == 23.0f);

// Initial value happens to be the identity in this case.
result = std::reduce(v.begin(), v.end(), 0.0f);
assert(result == 23.0f);

// Initial value is NOT the identity in this case.
float result_plus_3 = std::reduce(v.begin(), v.end(), 3.0f);
assert(result_plus_3 == 26.0f);

// Including arbitrarily many copies of the identity element
// does not change the reduction result.
std::vector<float> v2{5.0f, 0.0f, 7.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 11.0f, 0.0f};
result = std::reduce(v.begin(), v.end());
assert(result == 23.0f);
result = std::reduce(v.begin(), v.end(), 0.0f);
assert(result == 23.0f);
```

The identity element can serve as an initial value, but not vice versa. This is especially important for parallelism.

#### Initial value matters most for sequential reduction

From the serial execution perspective, it is easy to miss importance of the reduction identity. Let's consider typical code
that sums elements of an indexed array.

```c++
float sum = 0.0f;

> for (size_t i = 0; i<array_size; ++i)

Author: ```suggestion
for (size_t i = 0; i < array_size; ++i)

```

    sum += a[i];
```

The identity element `0.0f` is used to initialize the *accumulator* where the array values then sum up. However, if an initial
value for the reduction is provided, it replaces the identity in the code above. An implementation of `reduce` does not
therefore need to know the identity of its operation when an initial value is provided.

The initial value parameter of `reduce` also lets users express a "running reduction" where the whole range is not
available all at once and users need to call `reduce` repeatedly.

#### Identity element matters most for parallel reduction

> The situation is different for parallel execution, because there are more than one accumulator to initialize. Any parallel

Author: ```suggestion
The situation is different for parallel execution, because there are more than one accumulators to initialize. Any parallel

```

reduction somehow distributes the data over multiple threads of execution, and each one uses a local accumulator for its part
of the job. The initial value can be used to initialize at most one of those; for others, something else is needed.

If an identity `id` for a binary operator `op` is known, then here is a natural way to parallelize `reduce(`$R$`, init, op)`
over $P$ processors using the serial version as a building block.

1. Partition the range $R$ into $P$ distinct subsequences $S_p$.
2. On each processor $p$ compute a local result $L_p$ `= reduce(`$S_p$`, id, op)` (with `id` as the initial value).
3. Reduce over the local results $L_p$ with `init` as the initial value.

> It's not the only and not necessarily the best way though. For example, an implementation for the `unseq` policy probably

Author: ```suggestion
It's not the only way, though, and is also not necessarily the best way. For example, an implementation for the `unseq` policy probably

```

will not call the serial algorithm. Yet it also needs to somehow initialize local accumulators for each SIMD lane.

#### What to do when the identity element is unknown

Then, what happens to a parallel implementation of C++17 `std::reduce` with a user-defined binary operation, where the Standard
offers no way to know the operation's identity, if it exists? There are two other ways to initialize local accumulators:
either with values from the respective subsequences or with the reduction of two such values.

The type requirements of `std::reduce` seem to assume the second approach, as the type of the result is not required to be copy-constructible.

```c++
// using random access iterators for simplicity
auto sum = std::move(op(first[0], first[1])));
size_t sz = last - first;
for (size_t i = 2; i < sz; ++i)
    sum = std::move(op(sum, first[i]));
```

While technically doable, this approach is often suboptimal. In many use cases, the iteration space and the data storage are aligned

> (e.g. to `std::hardware_constructive_interference_size` or to the SIMD width) to allow for more efficient use of HW.

Author: ```suggestion
(e.g., to `std::hardware_constructive_interference_size` or to the SIMD width) to allow for more efficient use of HW.

```

In Python's NumPy library, [`numpy.ufunc.reduce`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ufunc.reduce.html) takes optional
initial values. If not provided and the binary operation (a "universal function" (ufunc), effectively an elementwise binary
operation on a possibly multidimensional array) has an identity, then the initial values default to the identity. If the
binary operation has no identity or the initial values are `None`, then this works like `reduce_first`.

#### Conclusions

Based on the above considerations, we conclude that there are good reasons to consider a mechanism for users to explicitly
specify the identity element for parallel reduction. There are options of how that could be achieved, of which we list a few.

- Add an optional extra parameter for the value of identity, defaulting to value initialization.
- Change the meaning of the `init` parameter for parallel algorithms to represent identity instead of the initial value.
- Provide a customization point similar to `sycl::known_identity` that also defaults to value initialization but can be
  specialized for a given operation.

> - Similarly to `std::linalg`, require that for numeric parallel algorithms a value-initialized object shall act as the identity element.

Author: Our SG1 talk spoke of other ways, like structs with specializations.  That discussion can go in the next version of the paper, though.

define the returned result(s) in terms of *GENERALIZED_SUM*. Those algorithms do that because they need to constrain the
precision of intermediate terms in the sum (so they need to define those terms). In our case, the Standard already uses
*GENERALIZED_SUM* and *GENERALIZED_NONCOMMUTATIVE_SUM* to define iterator-based C++17 algorithms like `reduce`,
`inclusive_scan`, and `exclusive_scan`.  We can just adapt this wording to talk about ranges instead of iterators. This
lets us imitate the approach of [@P3179R8] in adding ranges overloads.

Our approach combines the syntactic constraints used for the `fold_*` family of algorithms, with the semantic approach of
[@P1673R13] and the C++17 parallel numeric algorithms. For example, we constrain `reduce`'s binary operation with both
_`indirectly-binary-left-foldable`_ and _`indirectly-binary-right-foldable`_. (This expresses that if the binary operation
is called with an argument of the initial value's type `T`, then that argument can be in either the first or second
position.) We express what `reduce` does using *GENERALIZED_SUM*.

## Enabling list-initialization for proposed algorithms

> Our proposal follows the same principles as described in [@P2248R8] paper. We want to enable the use case with constructing

Author: ```suggestion
Our proposal follows the same principles as described in [@P2248R8]. We want to enable the use case with constructing

```
